1. J Neurosci. 2015 Dec 9;35(49):16159-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2034-15.2015.

Persistent Associative Plasticity at an Identified Synapse Underlying Classical
Conditioning Becomes Labile with Short-Term Homosynaptic Activation.

Hu J(1), Schacher S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University Medical Center, New York State
Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York 10032 jh2004@cumc.columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University Medical Center, New York State
Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York 10032.

Synapses express different forms of plasticity that contribute to different forms
of memory, and both memory and plasticity can become labile after reactivation.
We previously reported that a persistent form of nonassociative long-term
facilitation (PNA-LTF) of the sensorimotor synapses in Aplysia californica, a
cellular analog of long-term sensitization, became labile with short-term
heterosynaptic reactivation and reversed when the reactivation was followed by
incubation with the protein synthesis inhibitor rapamycin. Here we examined the
reciprocal impact of different forms of short-term plasticity (reactivations) on 
a persistent form of associative long-term facilitation (PA-LTF), a cellular
analog of classical conditioning, which was expressed at Aplysia sensorimotor
synapses when a tetanic stimulation of the sensory neurons was paired with a
brief application of serotonin on 2 consecutive days. The expression of
short-term homosynaptic plasticity [post-tetanic potentiation or homosynaptic
depression (HSD)], or short-term heterosynaptic plasticity [serotonin-induced
facilitation or neuropeptide Phe-Met-Arg-Phe-NH2 (FMRFa)-induced depression], at 
synapses expressing PA-LTF did not affect the maintenance of PA-LTF. The kinetics
of HSD was attenuated at synapses expressing PA-LTF, which required activation of
protein kinase C (PKC). Both PA-LTF and the attenuated kinetics of HSD were
reversed by either a transient blockade of PKC activity or a homosynaptic, but
not heterosynaptic, reactivation when paired with rapamycin. These results
indicate that two different forms of persistent synaptic plasticity, PA-LTF and
PNA-LTF, expressed at the same synapse become labile when reactivated by
different stimuli.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Activity-dependent changes in neural
circuits mediate long-term memories. Some forms of long-term memories become
labile and can be reversed with specific types of reactivations, but the
mechanism is complex. At the cellular level, reactivations that induce a reversal
of memory must evoke changes in neural circuits underlying the memory. What types
of reactivations induce a labile state at neural connections that lead to
reversal of different types of memory? We find that a critical neural connection 
in Aplysia, which is modified with different stimuli that mediate different types
of memory, becomes labile with different types of reactivations. These results
provide insights for developing strategies in alleviating maladaptive memories
accompanying anxiety disorders.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3516159-12$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4682782 [Available on 2016-06-09]
PMID: 26658867  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Neurosci. 2015 Nov 25;35(47):15649-65. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1364-15.2015.

Human Umbilical Tissue-Derived Cells Promote Synapse Formation and Neurite
Outgrowth via Thrombospondin Family Proteins.

Koh S(1), Kim N(2), Yin HH(3), Harris IR(4), Dejneka NS(4), Eroglu C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology. (2)Neurobiology. (3)Neurobiology, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, and Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina 27710, and. (4)Janssen Research and Development, Spring House,
Pennsylvania 19477. (5)Departments of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, Duke Institute 
for Brain Sciences, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27710, and
c.eroglu@cellbio.duke.edu.

Cell therapy demonstrates great potential for the treatment of neurological
disorders. Human umbilical tissue-derived cells (hUTCs) were previously shown to 
have protective and regenerative effects in animal models of stroke and retinal
degeneration, but the underlying therapeutic mechanisms are unknown. Because
synaptic dysfunction, synapse loss, degeneration of neuronal processes, and
neuronal death are hallmarks of neurological diseases and retinal degenerations, 
we tested whether hUTCs contribute to tissue repair and regeneration by
stimulating synapse formation, neurite outgrowth, and neuronal survival. To do
so, we used a purified rat retinal ganglion cell culture system and found that
hUTCs secrete factors that strongly promote excitatory synaptic connectivity and 
enhance neuronal survival. Additionally, we demonstrated that hUTCs support
neurite outgrowth under normal culture conditions and in the presence of the
growth-inhibitory proteins chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan, myelin basic
protein, or Nogo-A (reticulon 4). Furthermore, through biochemical fractionation 
and pharmacology, we identified the major hUTC-secreted synaptogenic factors as
the thrombospondin family proteins (TSPs), TSP1, TSP2, and TSP4. Silencing TSP
expression in hUTCs, using small RNA interference, eliminated both the
synaptogenic function of these cells and their ability to promote neurite
outgrowth. However, the majority of the prosurvival functions of hUTC-conditioned
media was spared after TSP knockdown, indicating that hUTCs secrete additional
neurotrophic factors. Together, our findings demonstrate that hUTCs affect
multiple aspects of neuronal health and connectivity through secreted factors,
and each of these paracrine effects may individually contribute to the
therapeutic function of these cells.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Human umbilical
tissue-derived cells (hUTC) are currently under clinical investigation for the
treatment of geographic atrophy secondary to age-related macular degeneration.
These cells show great promise for the treatment of neurological disorders;
however, the therapeutic effects of these cells on CNS neurons are not fully
understood. Here we provide compelling evidence that hUTCs secrete multiple
factors that work synergistically to enhance synapse formation and function, and 
support neuronal growth and survival. Moreover, we identified thrombospondins
(TSPs) as the hUTC-secreted factors that mediate the synaptogenic and
growth-promoting functions of these cells. Our findings highlight novel paracrine
effects of hUTC on CNS neuron health and connectivity and begin to unravel
potential therapeutic mechanisms by which these cells elicit their effects.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3515650-17$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4659827 [Available on 2016-05-25]
PMID: 26609158  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 21;35(42):14327-40. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2349-15.2015.

PSD-Zip70 Deficiency Causes Prefrontal Hypofunction Associated with Glutamatergic
Synapse Maturation Defects by Dysregulation of Rap2 Activity.

Mayanagi T(1), Yasuda H(2), Sobue K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Iwate Medical University, 2-1-1 Yahaba, Shiwa 028-3694, Japan, and.
(2)Education and Research Support Center, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi 371-8511, Japan. (3)Department of
Neuroscience, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, Iwate Medical
University, 2-1-1 Yahaba, Shiwa 028-3694, Japan, and ksobue@iwate-med.ac.jp.

Dysregulation of synapse formation and plasticity is closely related to the
pathophysiology of psychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders. The prefrontal
cortex (PFC) is particularly important for executive functions such as working
memory, cognition, and emotional control, which are impaired in the disorders.
PSD-Zip70 (Lzts1/FEZ1) is a postsynaptic density (PSD) protein predominantly
expressed in the frontal cortex, olfactory bulb, striatum, and hippocampus. Here 
we found that PSD-Zip70 knock-out (PSD-Zip70KO) mice exhibit working memory and
cognitive defects, and enhanced anxiety-like behaviors. These abnormal behaviors 
are caused by impaired glutamatergic synapse transmission accompanied by
tiny-headed immature dendritic spines in the PFC, due to aberrant Rap2
activation, which has roles in synapse formation and plasticity. PSD-Zip70
modulates the Rap2 activity by interacting with SPAR (spine-associated RapGAP)
and PDZ-GEF1 (RapGEF) in the postsynapse. Furthermore, suppression of the
aberrant Rap2 activation in the PFC rescued the behavioral defects in PSD-Zip70KO
mice. Our data demonstrate a critical role for PSD-Zip70 in Rap2-dependent spine 
synapse development in the PFC and underscore the importance of this regulation
in PFC-dependent behaviors.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: PSD-Zip70 deficiency causes
behavioral defects in working memory and cognition, and enhanced anxiety due to
prefrontal hypofunction. This study revealed that PSD-Zip70 plays essential roles
in glutamatergic synapse maturation via modulation of the Rap2 activity in the
PFC. PSD-Zip70 interacts with both SPAR (spine-associated RapGAP) and PDZ-GEF1
(RapGEF) and modulates the Rap2 activity in postsynaptic sites. Our results
provide a novel Rap2-specific regulatory mechanism in synaptic maturation
involving PSD-Zip70.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3514327-14$15.00/0.

PMID: 26490870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Neurosci. 2015 Aug 5;35(31):11056-67. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1069-15.2015.

Inositol Hexakisphosphate Kinase-3 Regulates the Morphology and Synapse Formation
of Cerebellar Purkinje Cells via Spectrin/Adducin.

Fu C(1), Xu J(1), Li RJ(2), Crawford JA(3), Khan AB(1), Ma TM(1), Cha JY(1),
Snowman AM(1), Pletnikov MV(3), Snyder SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience. (2)Departments of
Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, and. (3)Departments of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205. (4)The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Departments 
of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, and Departments of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205 ssnyder@jhmi.edu.

The inositol hexakisphosphate kinases (IP6Ks) are the principal enzymes that
generate inositol pyrophosphates. There are three IP6Ks (IP6K1, 2, and 3).
Functions of IP6K1 and IP6K2 have been substantially delineated, but little is
known of IP6K3's role in normal physiology, especially in the brain. To elucidate
functions of IP6K3, we generated mice with targeted deletion of IP6K3. We
demonstrate that IP6K3 is highly concentrated in the brain in cerebellar Purkinje
cells. IP6K3 physiologically binds to the cytoskeletal proteins adducin and
spectrin, whose mutual interactions are perturbed in IP6K3-null mutants.
Consequently, IP6K3 knock-out cerebella manifest abnormalities in Purkinje cell
structure and synapse number, and the mutant mice display deficits in motor
learning and coordination. Thus, IP6K3 is a major determinant of cytoskeletal
disposition and function of cerebellar Purkinje cells.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: We 
identified and cloned a family of three inositol hexakisphosphate kinases (IP6Ks)
that generate the inositol pyrophosphates, most notably 5-diphosphoinositol
pentakisphosphate (IP7). Of these, IP6K3 has been least characterized. In the
present study we generated IP6K3 knock-out mice and show that IP6K3 is highly
expressed in cerebellar Purkinje cells. IP6K3-deleted mice display defects of
motor learning and coordination. IP6K3-null mice manifest aberrations of Purkinje
cells with a diminished number of synapses. IP6K3 interacts with the cytoskeletal
proteins spectrin and adducin whose altered disposition in IP6K3 knock-out mice
may mediate phenotypic features of the mutant mice. These findings afford
molecular/cytoskeletal mechanisms by which the inositol polyphosphate system
impacts brain function.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3511056-12$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4524975
PMID: 26245967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Neurosci. 2015 Jul 1;35(26):9676-88. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0513-15.2015.

α6-Containing GABAA Receptors Are the Principal Mediators of Inhibitory Synapse
Strengthening by Insulin in Cerebellar Granule Cells.

Accardi MV(1), Brown PM(2), Miraucourt LS(3), Orser BA(4), Bowie D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Graduate Program in Pharmacology,
and. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Integrated Program in
Neuroscience, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3A 2B4, Canada, and.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics. (4)Department of Physiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada. (5)Department of
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, derek.bowie@mcgill.ca.

Activity-dependent strengthening of central synapses is a key factor driving
neuronal circuit behavior in the vertebrate CNS. At fast inhibitory synapses,
strengthening is thought to occur by increasing the number of GABAA receptors
(GABARs) of the same subunit composition to preexisting synapses. Here, we show
that strengthening of mouse cerebellar granule cell GABAergic synapses occurs by 
a different mechanism. Specifically, we show that the neuropeptide hormone,
insulin, strengthens inhibitory synapses by recruiting α6-containing GABARs
rather than accumulating more α1-containing receptors that are resident to the
synapse. Because α6-receptors are targeted to functionally distinct postsynaptic 
sites from α1-receptors, we conclude that only a subset of all inhibitory
synapses are strengthened. Together with our recent findings on stellate cells,
we propose a general mechanism by which mature inhibitory synapses are
strengthened. In this scenario, α1-GABARs resident to inhibitory synapses form
the hardwiring of neuronal circuits with receptors of a different composition
fulfilling a fundamental, but unappreciated, role in synapse strengthening.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/359676-13$15.00/0.

PMID: 26134650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Neurosci. 2015 Jul 1;35(26):9539-41. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1340-15.2015.

Early Events of Synapse Disassembly in the Damaged Retina.

Pottackal J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program and Department of Ophthalmology and
Visual Science, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06511 
joseph.pottackal@yale.edu.

Comment on
    J Neurosci. 2015 Feb 11;35(6):2423-31.

PMID: 26134636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Neurosci. 2015 Jun 24;35(25):9281-6. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0670-15.2015.

An Asymmetric Increase in Inhibitory Synapse Number Underlies the Development of 
a Direction Selective Circuit in the Retina.

Morrie RD(1), Feller MB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, and. (2)Department of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, and Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720 mfeller@berkeley.edu.

Neural circuits rely upon a precise wiring of their component neurons to perform 
meaningful computations. To compute the direction of motion in the visual scene, 
the direction selective circuit in the mouse retina depends on an asymmetry in
the inhibitory neurotransmission from starburst amacrine cells (SACs) to
direction selective ganglion cells (DSGCs). Specifically, depolarization of a SAC
on the null side of a DSGC causes a threefold greater unitary inhibitory
conductance than depolarization of a SAC on the preferred side. This asymmetry
emerges during the second postnatal week of development, but its basis remains
unknown. To determine the source of this asymmetry in inhibitory conductance, we 
conducted paired recordings between SACs and DSGCs at the beginning and end of
the second postnatal week. We replaced calcium with strontium to promote
asynchronous neurotransmitter release and produce quantal events. During the
second postnatal week the quantal frequency but not the quantal amplitude of
synaptic events increased more than threefold for null-side SAC-DSGC pairs but
remained constant for preferred-side pairs. In addition, paired-pulse depression 
did not differ between SACs located on the null and preferred sides of DSGCs,
indicating that all inhibitory SAC synapses onto a DSGC exhibit the same
probability of release. Thus, the higher quantal frequency seen in null-side
pairs results from a greater number of inhibitory synapses, revealing that an
asymmetry in synapse number between SACs and DSGCs underlies the development of
an essential component in the retina's direction selective circuit.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/359281-06$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4478249
PMID: 26109653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Neurosci. 2015 May 27;35(21):8272-90. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4841-14.2015.

Complexin stabilizes newly primed synaptic vesicles and prevents their premature 
fusion at the mouse calyx of held synapse.

Chang S(1), Reim K(2), Pedersen M(1), Neher E(3), Brose N(4), Taschenberger H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Membrane Biophysics, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany. (2)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Max
Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, 37075 Göttingen, Germany, and.
(3)Department of Membrane Biophysics, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany, DFG-Research Center for Nanoscale Microscopy
and Molecular Physiology of the Brain, 37073 Göttingen, Germany. (4)Department of
Molecular Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, 37075
Göttingen, Germany, and DFG-Research Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and
Molecular Physiology of the Brain, 37073 Göttingen, Germany. (5)Department of
Membrane Biophysics, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077
Göttingen, Germany, Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute of
Experimental Medicine, 37075 Göttingen, Germany, and DFG-Research Center for
Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the Brain, 37073 Göttingen,
Germany taschenberger@em.mpg.de.

Complexins (Cplxs) are small synaptic proteins that cooperate with
SNARE-complexes in the control of synaptic vesicle (SV) fusion. Studies involving
genetic mutation, knock-down, or knock-out indicated two key functions of Cplx
that are not mutually exclusive but cannot easily be reconciled, one in
facilitating SV fusion, and one in "clamping" SVs to prevent premature fusion.
Most studies on the role of Cplxs in mammalian synapse function have relied on
cultured neurons, heterologous expression systems, or membrane fusion assays in
vitro, whereas little is known about the function of Cplxs in native synapses. We
therefore studied consequences of genetic ablation of Cplx1 in the mouse calyx of
Held synapse, and discovered a developmentally exacerbating phenotype of reduced 
spontaneous and evoked transmission but excessive asynchronous release after
stimulation, compatible with combined facilitating and clamping functions of
Cplx1. Because action potential waveforms, Ca(2+) influx, readily releasable SV
pool size, and quantal size were unaltered, the reduced synaptic strength in the 
absence of Cplx1 is most likely a consequence of a decreased release probability,
which is caused, in part, by less tight coupling between Ca(2+) channels and
docked SV. We found further that the excessive asynchronous release in
Cplx1-deficient calyces triggered aberrant action potentials in their target
neurons, and slowed-down the recovery of EPSCs after depleting stimuli. The
augmented asynchronous release had a delayed onset and lasted hundreds of
milliseconds, indicating that it predominantly represents fusion of newly
recruited SVs, which remain unstable and prone to premature fusion in the absence
of Cplx1.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/358272-19$15.00/0.

PMID: 26019341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Neurosci. 2015 May 20;35(20):7736-49. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0004-15.2015.

PKMζ, but not PKCλ, is rapidly synthesized and degraded at the neuronal synapse.

Palida SF(1), Butko MT(1), Ngo JT(2), Mackey MR(3), Gross LA(2), Ellisman MH(4), 
Tsien RY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute. (3)National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research.
(4)National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research, Department of
Neurosciences, and. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, California 92093 rtsien@ucsd.edu.

Synthesizing, localizing, and stabilizing new protein copies at synapses are
crucial factors in maintaining the synaptic changes required for storing
long-term memories. PKMζ recently emerged as a molecule putatively responsible
for maintaining encoded memories over time because its presence correlates with
late LTP and because its inhibition disrupts LTP in vitro and long-term memory
storage in vivo. Here we investigated PKMζ stability in rat neurons to better
understand its role during information encoding and storage. We used TimeSTAMP
reporters to track the synthesis and degradation of PKMζ as well as a related
atypical PKC, PKCλ. These reporters revealed that both PKMζ and PKCλ were
upregulated after chemical LTP induction; however, these new PKMζ copies
exhibited more rapid turnover than basally produced PKMζ, particularly in
dendritic spines. In contrast to PKMζ, new PKCλ copies exhibited elevated
stability. Stable information storage over long periods of time is more
challenging the shorter the metabolic lifetime of the candidate molecules.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357736-14$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4438124
PMID: 25995463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Neurosci. 2015 Apr 8;35(14):5504-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2548-14.2015.

Neuronal pentraxin 1 negatively regulates excitatory synapse density and synaptic
plasticity.

Figueiro-Silva J(1), Gruart A(2), Clayton KB(1), Podlesniy P(1), Abad MA(1),
Gasull X(3), Delgado-García JM(2), Trullas R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Unit, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), 08036 Barcelona, Spain, Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (2)División de Neurociencias,
Universidad Pablo de Olavide, 41013 Sevilla, Spain. (3)Laboratory of
Neurophysiology, School of Medicine, University of Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona,
Spain, and Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
08036 Barcelona, Spain. (4)Neurobiology Unit, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques de Barcelona, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
08036 Barcelona, Spain, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain ramon.trullas@iibb.csic.es.

In mature neurons, the number of synapses is determined by a neuronal
activity-dependent dynamic equilibrium between positive and negative regulatory
factors. We hypothesized that neuronal pentraxin (NP1), a proapoptotic protein
induced by low neuronal activity, could be a negative regulator of synapse
density because it is found in dystrophic neurites in Alzheimer's
disease-affected brains. Here, we report that knockdown of NP1 increases the
number of excitatory synapses and neuronal excitability in cultured rat cortical 
neurons and enhances excitatory drive and long-term potentiation in the
hippocampus of behaving mice. Moreover, we found that NP1 regulates the surface
expression of the Kv7.2 subunit of the Kv7 family of potassium channels that
control neuronal excitability. Furthermore, pharmacological activation of Kv7
channels prevents, whereas inhibition mimics, the increase in synaptic proteins
evoked by the knockdown of NP1. These results indicate that NP1 negatively
regulates excitatory synapse number by modulating neuronal excitability and show 
that NP1 restricts excitatory synaptic plasticity.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/355504-18$15.00/0.

PMID: 25855168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Neurosci. 2015 Feb 11;35(6):2508-15. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3756-14.2015.

Anatomical changes at the level of the primary synapse in neuropathic pain:
evidence from the spinal trigeminal nucleus.

Wilcox SL(1), Gustin SM(1), Macey PM(2), Peck CC(3), Murray GM(3), Henderson
LA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Histology, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia 2006. (2)University of California, Los Angeles, School of
Nursing and Brain Research Institute, Los Angeles, California 90095, and. (3)Jaw 
Function and Orofacial Pain Research Unit, Faculty of Dentistry, Westmead
Hospital, University of Sydney, Australia 2145. (4)Department of Anatomy and
Histology, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia 2006,
lukeh@anatomy.usyd.edu.au.

Accumulated evidence from experimental animal models suggests that neuronal loss 
within the dorsal horn is involved in the development and/or maintenance of
peripheral neuropathic pain. However, to date, no study has specifically
investigated whether such neuroanatomical changes also occur at this level in
humans. Using brain imaging techniques, we sought to determine whether anatomical
changes were present in the spinal trigeminal nucleus in subjects with chronic
orofacial neuropathic pain. In 22 subjects with painful trigeminal neuropathy and
44 pain-free controls, voxel-based morphometry of T1-weighted anatomical images
and diffusion tensor images were used to assess regional gray matter volume and
microstructural changes within the brainstem. In addition, deterministic
tractography was used to assess the integrity of ascending pain pathways.
Orofacial neuropathic pain was associated with significant regional gray matter
volume decreases, fractional anisotropy increases, and mean diffusivity decreases
within the spinal trigeminal nucleus, specifically the subnucleus oralis. In
addition, tractography revealed no significant differences in diffusivity
properties in the root entry zone of the trigeminal nerve, the spinal trigeminal 
tract, or the ventral trigeminothalamic tracts in painful trigeminal neuropathy
subjects compared with controls. These data reveal that chronic neuropathic pain 
in humans is associated with discrete alterations in the anatomy of the primary
synapse. These neuroanatomical changes may be critical for the generation and/or 
maintenance of pathological pain.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/352508-08$15.00/0.

PMID: 25673845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Neurosci. 2015 Feb 4;35(5):2083-100. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2753-14.2015.

Ca2+ channel to synaptic vesicle distance accounts for the readily releasable
pool kinetics at a functionally mature auditory synapse.

Chen Z(1), Das B(2), Nakamura Y(3), DiGregorio DA(3), Young SM Jr(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Molecular Mechanisms of Synaptic Function, Max Planck Florida
Institute, Jupiter, Florida 33458. (2)Research Group Molecular Mechanisms of
Synaptic Function, Max Planck Florida Institute, Jupiter, Florida 33458,
Integrative Program in Biology and Neuroscience, Florida Atlantic University,
Jupiter, Florida 33458. (3)Laboratory of Dynamic Neuronal Imaging, Institut
Pasteur, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France, and CNRS UMR 3571, 75724 Paris Cedex 15,
France. (4)Research Group Molecular Mechanisms of Synaptic Function, Max Planck
Florida Institute, Jupiter, Florida 33458, sam.young@mpfi.org.

Precise regulation of synaptic vesicle (SV) release at the calyx of Held is
critical for auditory processing. At the prehearing calyx of Held, synchronous
and asynchronous release is mediated by fast and slow releasing SVs within the
readily releasable pool (RRP). However, the posthearing calyx has dramatically
different release properties. Whether developmental alterations in RRP properties
contribute to the accelerated release time course found in posthearing calyces is
not known. To study these questions, we performed paired patch-clamp recordings, 
deconvolution analysis, and numerical simulations of buffered Ca(2+) diffusion
and SV release in postnatal day (P) 16-19 mouse calyces, as their release
properties resemble mature calyces of Held. We found the P16-P19 calyx RRP
consists of two pools: a fast pool (τ ≤ 0.9 ms) and slow pool (τ ∼4 ms), in which
release kinetics and relative composition of the two pools were unaffected by 5
mm EGTA. Simulations of SV release from the RRP revealed that two populations of 
SVs were necessary to reproduce the experimental release rates: (1) SVs located
close (∼5-25 nm) and (2) more distal (25-100 nm) to VGCC clusters. This
positional coupling was confirmed by experiments showing 20 mm EGTA
preferentially blocked distally coupled SVs. Lowering external [Ca(2+)] to in
vivo levels reduced only the fraction SVs released from the fast pool. Therefore,
we conclude that a dominant parameter regulating the mature calyx RRP release
kinetics is the distance between SVs and VGCC clusters.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/352083-18$15.00/0.

PMID: 25653365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 7;35(1):386-95. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3284-14.2015.

cJun and CREB2 in the postsynaptic neuron contribute to persistent long-term
facilitation at a behaviorally relevant synapse.

Hu JY(1), Levine A(2), Sung YJ(3), Schacher S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York 10032 and
jh2004@columbia.edu. (2)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University College
of Physicians and Surgeons, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New
York 10032 and. (3)The Commonwealth Medical College, Department of Basic
Sciences, Scranton, Pennsylvania 18509.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2015 May 27;35(21):8039-41.

Basic region leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors regulate gene expression
critical for long-term synaptic plasticity or neuronal excitability contributing 
to learning and memory. At sensorimotor synapses of Aplysia, changes in
activation or expression of CREB1 and CREB2 in sensory neurons are required for
long-term synaptic plasticity. However, it is unknown whether concomitant
stimulus-induced changes in expression and activation of bZIP transcription
factors in the postsynaptic motor neuron also contribute to persistent long-term 
facilitation (P-LTF). We overexpressed various forms of CREB1, CREB2, or cJun in 
the postsynaptic motor neuron L7 in cell culture to examine whether these factors
contribute to P-LTF. P-LTF is evoked by 2 consecutive days of 5-HT applications
(2 5-HT), while a transient form of LTF is produced by 1 day of 5-HT applications
(1 5-HT). Significant increases in the expression of both cJun and CREB2 mRNA in 
L7 accompany P-LTF. Overexpressing each bZIP factor in L7 did not alter basal
synapse strength, while coexpressing cJun and CREB2 in L7 evoked persistent
increases in basal synapse strength. In contrast, overexpressing cJun and CREB2
in sensory neurons evoked persistent decreases in basal synapse strength.
Overexpressing wild-type cJun or CREB2, but not CREB1, in L7 can replace the
second day of 5-HT applications in producing P-LTF. Reducing cJun activity in L7 
blocked P-LTF evoked by 2 5-HT. These results suggest that expression and
activation of different bZIP factors in both presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons
contribute to persistent change in synapse strength including stimulus-dependent 
long-term synaptic plasticity.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/350386-10$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4287154
PMID: 25568130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 7;35(1):287-98. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0244-14.2015.

Altered sensory experience exacerbates stable dendritic spine and synapse loss in
a mouse model of Huntington's disease.

Murmu RP(1), Li W(1), Szepesi Z(1), Li JY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neural Plasticity and Repair Unit, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department 
of Experimental Medical Sciences, Lund University, BMC A10, 22184 Lund, Sweden,
and. (2)Neural Plasticity and Repair Unit, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center,
Department of Experimental Medical Sciences, Lund University, BMC A10, 22184
Lund, Sweden, and Neuroscience Institute, College of Life and Health Sciences,
Northeastern University, Shenyang 110015, People's Republic of China
jia-yi.li@med.lu.se jiayili@mail.neu.edu.cn.

A key question in Huntington's disease (HD) is what underlies the early cognitive
deficits that precede the motor symptoms and the characteristic neuronal death
observed in HD. The mechanisms underlying cognitive symptoms in HD remain
unknown. Postmortem HD brain and animal model studies demonstrate pathologies in 
dendritic spines and abnormal synaptic plasticity before motor symptoms and
neurodegeneration. Experience-dependent synaptic plasticity caused by mechanisms 
such as LTP or novel sensory experience potentiates synaptic strength, enhances
new dendritic spine formation and stabilization, and may contribute to normal
cognitive processes, such as learning and memory. We have previously reported
that under baseline conditions (without any sensory manipulation) neuronal
circuitry in HD (R6/2 mouse model) was highly unstable, which led to a
progressive loss of persistent spines in these mice, and that mutant huntingtin
was directly involved in the process. Here, we investigated whether pathological 
processes of HD interfere with the normal experience-dependent plasticity of
dendritic spines in the R6/2 model. Six weeks of two-photon in vivo imaging
before and after whisker trimming revealed that sensory deprivation exacerbates
loss of persistent-type, stable spines in R6/2 mice compared with wild-type
littermates. In addition, sensory deprivation leads to impaired transformation of
newly generated spines into persistent spines in R6/2 mice. As a consequence,
reduced synaptic density and decreased PSD-95 protein levels are evident in their
barrel cortical neurons. These data suggest that mutant huntingtin is implicated 
in maladaptive synaptic plasticity, which could be one of the plausible
mechanisms underlying early cognitive deficits in HD.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/350287-12$15.00/0.

PMID: 25568121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

